continuous integration:--
	programmer team will writes the code.
	Then it is pushed to GitHub(version control repository)
	then, it will be moved to build server there it will built,tested,evaluated.if error then developer gets 		notification.
	then, stored in a software repository whee an artifact i generated (archiva,sonatype nexus,grunt)
	build tools: based on programming language(maven,gradle,visual build)
	CI tools:Jenkins,Bamboo CI

	It is a process of automating built,testing when the programmers commits code each time.
	By doing this we get bugs earlier instead of writing the whole code and testing it.


continuous delivery:--
	It is continuous after of CI when the code is build and tested then a artifact file is saved.
	It is responsible for deploying,server provisioning,dependiencies,conf changes,network.It is automated.
	tools:-Jenkins for CI/CD automation,Terraform for cloud automation,Ansible for System automation.
	
software testing:--
	functional,load,performance,DB,security and other testings


The Tools and its installation:----
	Choclatey: Install it from chrome. Its a software which makes us able to install all other softwares in 			windows using power shell.

BIOS:-----
	BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) settings are configuration parameters that determine how hardware 	interacts with the operating system during the boot process and system operation. 

ISO file:--
	An ISO file represents a virtual disc, containing all the files, folders, and the structure of the 	original physical disc. 
	An ISO file, also known as an ISO image, is a single file that contains an exact copy of the data on an 	optical disc, like a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray.

vdi file:---
	A centos vm.vdi file in the context of CentOS is a VirtualBox disk image file that represents the virtual 	hard disk for a CentOS virtual machine. It stores the data and files of the CentOS operating system, 	similar to how a physical hard drive stores data for a regular computer.

virtual machine setup:-----
	create a virtual by clicking on new button
	select the specifications memory,ram,cpu

Install OS on virtual machine:----
	cent os type-linux, subtype:redhat
	download iso file and goto storage in settings and place it in controller->empty disc.

	network adapter settings
	 goto network->adapter2
	 attached to->bridged adapter
	 name->go to control panel->Network&Internet->Network&SharingCenter->ChangeAdapterSetting->Wifi 
	in cmd type 'ip addr show' and access ip address by using it you can login on git					'ssh username@your_server_ip'.

Its time to use Vagrant for automation setup of os in virtual box:---
	goto gitbash and 'mkdir /D/vagrant-vms'
	In vagrant-vms folder create sub-folder ubuntuos and centos
	goto vagrant cloud-'https://portal.cloud.hashicorp.com/vagrant/discover?query=centos%209'
		then click on eurolinux-vagrant/centos-stream-9
		then copy vagrant init eurolinux-vagrant/centos-stream-9 --box-version 9.0.48
		then set path to F/vagrant-vms/centos and paste it
		after installation then cmd 'vagrant up' then check it cmd 'vagrant box list'
	vagrant init -to initialize current directory with vagrant env and create vagrant file
	vagrant up -to create,configure and run vm
	vagrant ssh - for login into vm
	whoami -to see which logged user
	sudo -i :to switch from Vagrant to root user
	exit :for exiting from vm or out
	vagrant halt :to shutdown vm
	vagrant halt <id>:when multiple vm's are running wants to shutdown particular vm by its id
	vagrant status :to check machine is off or on
	vagrant global-status :to check status of all the vm's.
	vagrant reload :to reboot vm if there is changes in configuration
	vagrant destroy :to delete vm
	history :for seeing cmd history

vimtext editor:-----
	yyp -for copy paste
	ddp -for cut paste
	dd  -for delete
	4dd -for deleting multiple lines
	there are still more cmd refer from documents

sudo -i access for other users:----------
	visudo -by this cmd u will go to text editor
	   then goto line 101 and copy same as line 101 only change username
	   if u want to add user or passwd then before use sudo useradd user_name

	if u make any mistake in sudoers file then sudo cmd will not work
	so,instead of modifying sudoer goto cd /etc/sudoers.d/ 
	then, cp vagrant devops
	then, vim devops and change vagrant to devops
	

vagrant files:-
	lets understand how the vagrant works and what is inside vagrant file
	vagrant file contains some set of instructions that defines the configuration of VM.
	and we can customize it like increase the cpu and ram.
	if we do any changes in Vagrantfile then 'vagrant reload' cmd should be done to update changes.
	
	we can create a common folder that can be accessed in both host-os and guest-os 
		config.vm.synced_folder "./scripts", "/scripts" 
		  ./refers to the project folder of host-os and scripts is a folder in that.
		  /scripts is folder in guest-os
		if i create a file in vm it will be reflected in windows and vice-versa.
	
	config.vm.provision "shell"  :learn tis in vs code using copilot
		it will run shell cmds only first time when vm is created
		if u want to do next time then, run vagrant provision


	